Add CF Pages Function Fauna Tutorial (#6890)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: content/pages/tutorials/build-a-fullstack-app-with-pages-function-with-fauna-nextjs/index.md

## Prerequisites

- A recent version of [Node and NPM](https://docs.npmjs.com/getting-started) on your computer
- A [Cloudflare](https://www.cloudflare.com/) account
- A [Fauna](https://fauna.com/?utm_source=[graphql/aws/cloudflare]&utm_medium=fauna_workshop&utm_campaign=fauna_workshop) account

## What is a globally distributed app?

Before you continue, let’s explore what a globally distributed app is and why you might want to build one. A globally distributed app always runs closest to the end user, thus making the application response time extremely fast.

Cloudflare [Pages](https://developers.cloudflare.com/pages/) and Pages Functions will run closest to the end user without you maintaining a server. Fauna is a globally distributed database system, that ensures data reads and writes always happen on the closest replicas of your database. This combination of Pages Functions and Fauna allows you to build highly performant apps with very low latency.

> ## Create a new Project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create a new project
```

```
$ git remote add origin <YOUR_GITHUB_REPO_URL>
$ git branch -M main
$ git push -u origin main

```

### Deploy with Cloudflare Pages

If you haven’t already signed up for a free Cloudflare Pages account, [create an account now](https://dash.cloudflare.com/pages).

1. Log in to the [Cloudflare dashboard](https://dash.cloudflare.com/).
1. In **Account Home**, select **Pages** > **Create a project**.
1. In the build settings select `Next.js` you can leave everything else as default.

![Configure deployment](/pages/tutorials/build-a-fullstack-app-with-pages-function-with-fauna-nextjs/configure-build.png)

4. In the environment variable section add a new variable called `NODE_VERSION` and add the node version of your project. **You require a node version 14 or greater.**

![Define Node Version in cloud flare configuration](/pages/tutorials/build-a-fullstack-app-with-pages-function-with-fauna-nextjs/node_version.png)

5. Next, go to **Settings > Functions** and under compatibility flags add the following flags.

> `streams_enable_constructors`, `transformstream_enable_standard_constructor`. 
> 
> ![adding compatibility flags](/pages/tutorials/build-a-fullstack-app-with-pages-function-with-fauna-nextjs/compatibility.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Add compatibility flags by following the instructions above](/pages/tutorials/build-a-fullstack-app-with-pages-function-with-fauna-nextjs/compatibility.png)
```

Next, visit [`https://<your-domain-name>/api/hello`](https://with-cloudflare-nextjs.pages.dev/api/hello) to make sure that the Pages function is working as expected. 

## Configure Fauna database

1. Head over to [Fauna](https://dashboard.fauna.com/) and create an account if you haven’t done so already. 
2. Next, create a new database. Give your database a name. Select the *classic region group* and select *create*.

Info:  *By default, Fauna allows you to save your data globally closer to your user. However, you can also limit your data's distribution to a specific geographic region group to comply with GDPR and data residency. Learn more about region groups [here](https://docs.fauna.com/fauna/current/learn/understanding/region_groups).*

*You also have the option to save data into privately distributed nodes with [Virtual Private Fauna.](https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2022/11/17/2558259/0/en/Fauna-Launches-Virtual-Private-Offering-of-its-Serverless-Database-for-the-Most-Demanding-Enterprise-Applications.html)*

![Create a database](/pages/tutorials/build-a-fullstack-app-with-pages-function-with-fauna-nextjs/create_database.png)

> 3. Next, select *create new collection*. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Next, select **NEW COLLECTION*. 
```

![Create a new collection](/pages/tutorials/build-a-fullstack-app-with-pages-function-with-fauna-nextjs/new_collection.png)

> 4. Create a new Collection called `Products`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Create a new Collection called `Products`.
```

![Create a new Collection called Products](/pages/tutorials/build-a-fullstack-app-with-pages-function-with-fauna-nextjs/new_prod_collection.png)

> 5. You would require a secret to query your database from your application. Navigate to *Security > Keys* and select *New Key*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. You need a secret to query your database from your application. Go to **Security** > **Keys** and select **New Key**.
```

![New Key](/pages/tutorials/build-a-fullstack-app-with-pages-function-with-fauna-nextjs/new_key.png)

> 6. Select `Server` Role from the dropdown. Give your key a name and select *Save*. When the key is generated save it into a secure file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Select *Server* as your **Role**. 
8. Give your key a name and select **Save**. When the key is generated, save it into a secure file.
```

![New Key Role](/pages/tutorials/build-a-fullstack-app-with-pages-function-with-fauna-nextjs/new_key_conf.png)

> 7. For local development create a new file called `.env` in the root of your project and add the following code. Make sure you add `.env` to your git ignore file so it doesn’t get committed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
9. For local development, create a new file called `.env` in the root of your project and add the following code. Make sure you add `.env` to your `.gitignore` file so it does not get committed.
```

```bash
FAUNA_SECRET=fnAExxxx
```

> 8. Finally, head back to Cloudflare Pages settings and add a new environment variable called FAUNA_SECRET. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
10. Lastly, go to **Pages** in the Cloudflare dashboard > **Settings** > **Environment Variables** and add a new environment variable called `FAUNA_SECRET` with a value of ____. 
```
What is the value for the variable?

> ![Fauna Secret](/pages/tutorials/build-a-fullstack-app-with-pages-function-with-fauna-nextjs/fauna_secret.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
![Instructions for adding a `FAUNA_SECRET` variable are above.](/pages/tutorials/build-a-fullstack-app-with-pages-function-with-fauna-nextjs/fauna_secret.png)
```

## Build the Next.js application

> ### Create the add product page (Frontend)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create the add product page
```

> Create a new front-end page to add data to your database. Create a new file `pages/add-products.js` in your project and add the following code to it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new front-end page to add data to your database. Create a new file `pages/add-products.js` in your project and add the following code:
```

> ```jsx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```jsx
---
filename: pages/add-products.js
---
```

  
  const [state, setState] = useState({
    title: '',
    price: '',
    description: '',
  });

  const handleChange = (e) => {
    const { name, value } = e.target;
    setState({ ...state, [name]: value });
  };

  const submitForm = async (e) => {
    e.preventDefault();
    // Make a API call to create a product
    
    await fetch('/api/products', {
      method: 'POST',
      body: JSON.stringify(state),
    });

    setState({
      title: '',
      price: '',
      description: '',
    });
  }

  return (
    <div className="container">
      <h1>Add Products</h1>
      <form onSubmit={submitForm}>
        <label htmlFor="title">Title</label>
        <input type="text" name="title" value={state.title} onChange={handleChange}/>
        <br />
        <label htmlFor="price">Price</label>
        <input type="number" name="price" value={state.price} onChange={handleChange}/>
        <br />
        <label htmlFor="description" >Description</label>
        <textarea name="description" value={state.description} onChange={handleChange}/>
        <br />
        <button type="submit">Add Product</button>
      </form>
    </div>
  );
}
```

> In the previous code block you have a simple form component to add products. On form submit it calls the `/api/products` api routes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the above code block, you have a simple form component to add products. On form submit, it calls the `/api/products` API route. 
```
1. "On form submit..." What is 'form submit'?

> Run the application locally with the following command.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Run the application locally with the following command:
```

```bash
$ npm run dev
```

> Visit [`http://localhost:3000/add-products`](http://localhost:3000/add-products) and try to create a new product.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to [`http://localhost:3000/add-products`](http://localhost:3000/add-products) and try to create a new product.
```

> Notice, when you submit the form it gives you a *404 not found error.* This is because the api route for `api/products` doesn’t exist yet. Let’s go ahead and create the API route next. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you submit the form, it returns a `404 Not found` error. This is because the API route for `api/products` does not exist yet. You will now create the API route. 
```

> ### Create the api route to add product (Backend)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Create the API route to add product
```

> Create a new file `pages/api/products.js` and add the following code to the file.

Reviewer: Where are they creating this file?

> ```jsx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```jsx
---
filename: pages/api/products.js
---
```

// pages/api/products.js

export const config = {
  runtime: 'experimental-edge',
}

export default async function (req) {
  if(req.method === 'POST') {
    const { title, price, description } = req.body;
    // Save the product to the database
    // TODO: Add Database Code here
    return new Response(
      JSON.stringify({ message: 'Product created successfully' }),
      {
        status: 200,
        headers: {
          'Content-Type': 'application/json'
        }
      }
    )
  }
}
```

> Try creating a new product from the `add-products` page again. Open the network tab in your browser and notice that on form submit you will not get a 404 error anymore. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a new product from the `add-products` page. Open the network tab in your browser and notice that on form submit you will not get a `404` error anymore. 
```
"network tab in your browser" is this talking about Chrome devtools? Need to be specific on this navigation.

### Reading data from request body in Edge Runtime

> The Next.js Edge Runtime is based on standard Web APIs. This is slightly different than the default Node.js-powered API route. The request body for Edge Runtime gives you a [ReadableStream](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream/ReadableStream). You have to decode this to read the request body. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Next.js Edge Runtime is based on standard Web APIs. This is different than the default Node.js-powered API route. The request body for Edge Runtime gives you a [ReadableStream](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ReadableStream/ReadableStream). You must decode this to read the request body. 
```

Make the following changes to your `pages/api/products.js` file to read the request body data.

```jsx
export const config = {
  runtime: 'experimental-edge',
}

export default async function (req) {
  if(req.method === 'POST') {
    const body = await readRequestBodyStream(req.body);
    const { title, price, description } = JSON.parse(body);
    // TODO: Save the product to the database
    return new Response(
      JSON.stringify({ 
        message: 'Product created successfully'
      }),
      {
        status: 200,
        headers: {
          'Content-Type': 'application/json'
        }
      }
    )
  }
}

async function readRequestBodyStream(body) {
  const reader = body.getReader();
  let result = new Uint8Array(0);

  while (true) {
    const { done, value } = await reader.read();
    if (done) {
        break;
    }

    const newResult = new Uint8Array(result.length + value.length);
    newResult.set(result);
    newResult.set(value, result.length);
    result = newResult;
  }
  return new TextDecoder().decode(result);
}
```

> However, this is not saving the data in our database yet. Next, let’s add the code for database operation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will not be able to save the data in your database yet. Next, you will add the code for database operation.
```

### Adding database operations

install the fauna package in your project by running the following command. 

```bash
$ npm i faunadb --save
```

Next, create a new file called `db.js` and add the following code.

> ```jsx
> // db.js

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```jsx
---
filename: db.js
---
```

export const createProduct = async (title, price, description) => {
  const product = {
    data: {
      title,
      price,
      description,
    },
  };
  return client.query(q.Create(q.Collection('Products'), product));
};
```

You can import the `createProduct` function into your Edge runtime and execute it to create a new database record.

```jsx
// partials of pages/api/products.js
import { createProduct } from '../../db'

// ...

export default async function (req) {
  if(req.method === 'POST') {
    const body = await readRequestBodyStream(req.body);
    const { title, price, description } = JSON.parse(body);
    
    // Save the product to the database
    const product = await createProduct(title, price, description);

    return new Response(
      JSON.stringify({ 
        message: 'Product created successfully',
        product: {
          id: product.ref.id,
          title,
          price,
          description,
        },
      }),
      {
        status: 200,
        headers: {
          'Content-Type': 'application/json'
        }
      }
    )
  }
}
// ... Rest of the file
```

### Retrieve Products API

> Next, go ahead and create new database function to retrieve all the products. Add the following function to your `db.js` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will now create a new database function to retrieve all the products. Add the following function to your `db.js` file.
```

> ```jsx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```jsx
---
filename: db.js
---
```

// db.js

// ... Rest of file

export const getProducts = async () => {
  const response = await client.query(
    q.Map(
      q.Paginate(q.Documents(q.Collection('Products'))),
      q.Lambda(x => q.Get(x))
    )
  );
  const products = response.data.map((product) => ({ ...product.data, _id: product.ref.id }));
  return products;
}
```

Make the following changes in your `pages/index.js` to retrieve all the products.

> ```jsx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```jsx
---
filename: pages/index.js
---
```

import styles from '../styles/Home.module.css'
import { getProducts } from '../db';

export const config = {
  runtime: 'experimental-edge',
}

export async function getServerSideProps() {
  const faunaSecret = process.env.FAUNA_SECRET;
  const products = await getProducts();
  return {
    props: {
      products,
      faunaSecret
    },
  }
}

export default function Home({ products, faunaSecret }) {
  return (
    <div className={styles.container}>
      <h1>Products</h1>
      <ul>
      {
        products.map((product) => (
          <li key={product._id}>
            <h2>{product.title}</h2>
            <p>{product.description}</p>
            <p>{product.price}</p>
          </li>
        ))
      }
      </ul>
    </div>
  )
} 
```

> ## Global Application Benchmark

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Test your application's speed
```

> Go to [https://www.webpagetest.org/](https://www.webpagetest.org/) and paste in your website url to check the performance of your global application. You can pick up various global location and network speed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Go to [https://www.webpagetest.org/](https://www.webpagetest.org/) and paste in your website URL to check the performance of your global application.
```

> For this simple application, the page resolves in less 15ms on average from different servers across the globe. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this simple application, the page should resolve in less 15 ms on average from different servers across the globe. 
```

> The compute and database operations are almost the same across the globe. The powerful combination of Cloudflare CDN, workers and Fauna database allow your code and data to run closer to your end user reducing application latency globally. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The compute and database operations are almost the same across the globe. The combination of Cloudflare CDN, Workers and Fauna database allows your code and data to run closer to your end user reducing application latency globally. 
```

> ## Where to go from here

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Related resources
```

> If you are looking to build something more practical and hands on we have created a self paced workshop on "How to build a global application with Cloudflare and Fauna". You can check this out [here](https://github.com/fauna-labs/fauna-workers).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [How to build a global application with Cloudflare and Fauna](https://github.com/fauna-labs/fauna-workers)
```
